Coding interview post (#15)
dafny-lang/blog: _posts/2023-11-08-cracking-the-coding-interview-in-dafny-permutations.markdown

      multiset(p) - multiset([p[i]]);
      multiset(s) - multiset([s[j]]);
      { assert s[..j] + [s[j]] + s[j+1..] == s; }
      multiset(s[..j] + [s[j]] + s[j+1..]) - multiset([s[j]]);
      multiset(s[..j]) + multiset([s[j]]) + multiset(s[j+1..]) - multiset([s[j]]);
      multiset(s[..j]) + multiset(s[j+1..]);
      multiset(s[..j] + s[j+1..]);
      multiset(DeleteAt(s, j));
    }
  }
}
```

The proof of `PermutationBeforeAndAfterDeletionAt` is mostly a direct consequence of the involved definitions, and otherwise uses properties of `multiset` that we’ve encountered before.

To establish ii), that is, the equality `p == InsertAt(p’, s[0], i)`, we recall that by construction `p' == DeleteAt(p, i)`. Substituting `p’` for its definition and using the postcondition `p[i] == s[0]` of `FirstOccurrence` thus leads us to the following lemma, which states that deleting an element of a sequence, before inserting it again at the same position, leaves the initial sequence unchanged:

```
lemma InsertAfterDeleteAt<T>(s: seq<T>, i: nat)
  requires i < |s|
  ensures s == InsertAt(DeleteAt(s, i), s[i], i)
{}
```

This concludes our proof!

## Conclusion

> Using Dafny, we were able to i) translate the informal task of writing a function that returns the set of all permutations of a given sequence into a formal, mathematical specification; ii) implement a potential solution to the problem — in this case, in a purely functional style; and iii) formally verify, with a mathematical proof, that the proposed solution is correct. Along the way, we encountered Dafny’s [`seq`](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-sequences), [`set`](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-sets), [`iset`](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-sets), and [`multiset`](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-multisets) types, discussed [type parameters](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-type-parameters), proved theorems by induction, reasoned equationally with the [`calc`](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-calc-statement) statement, and made heavy use of Dafny’s capability of divide-and-conquer complex lemmas into smaller, feasible components. I hope you enjoyed the ride. The full Dafny source code of this post is available [here](../../../../assets/src/cracking-the-coding-interview-permutations/permutations.dfy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Dafny, we were able to i) translate the informal task of writing a function that returns the set of all permutations of a given sequence into a formal, mathematical specification; ii) implement a potential solution to the problem — in this case, in a purely functional style; and iii) formally verify, with a mathematical proof, that the proposed solution is correct. Along the way, we encountered Dafny’s [`seq`](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-sequences), [`set`](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-sets), [`iset`](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-sets), and [`multiset`](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-multisets) types, discussed [type parameters](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-type-parameters), proved theorems by induction, reasoned equationally with the [`calc`](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-calc-statement) statement, and made heavy use of Dafny’s capability to subdivide complex lemmas into smaller, feasible components. I hope you enjoyed the ride. The full Dafny source code of this post is available [here](../../../../assets/src/cracking-the-coding-interview-permutations/permutations.dfy).
```
